So the first question is if you'd like to tell me about your experience of coming to Wales.
It was very nice coming to Wales. I came from East Africa, direct to Wales.
Yeah, it was a seven-hours travel, two flights, changed in Amsterdam, then I got here.
But I arrived in Wales very late, because there was a delay. I came in 2022 December.
So from 2022 December to date, I've been around.
So about a year and a half.
Yeah, a year and a half.
And what were your first impressions of Wales?
Oh, Wales is very cold. Oh my God, Wales is very cold.
I always feel like, come out of the house, it's warm, with no time, it's raining.
So the weather is unpredictable. But I like it because it's quiet. It's a quiet place here.
Wales is very quiet. It doesn't have too much activity like London compared to London.
So I like this kind of environment.
And over the year and a half that you've been here, have your impressions of living in Wales changed?
Like wanting to live in Wales?
Or just what it's like to live in Wales?
Yeah, of course. I came from abroad, and this was my first experience of leaving my home country to UK and Wales.
Definitely I'm trying to adjust to very many things, especially the dress code.
You have to put on a lot of things to cover yourself from cold.
When I had just arrived, I froze. I was not told that I'm supposed to have a warm shoe on me and diaper clothes, stuff like that.
Our country is very warm. So these things of freezing on the street, I didn't have any clue.
I suffered. That day I had to go to the shop and I explained to the lady in the shop.
She told me next time, don't come out of the house when you dress like this.
And that's how I started adjusting. And you know, if it is winter, you don't dress up like you in Africa.
Yes, you don't dress up like you in Africa. You have to really cover yourself nicely.
The cold can frustrate you. I couldn't lift my legs. It was that bad. I couldn't lift my legs.
But this time, this year, I knew how to dress up. And I'm actually fine.
Do you have a favourite item of clothing that you would save for the day?
Yes, I have my favourite goods. My favourite trousers, my favourite jacket, my favourite cardigan.
Yeah, I put on my cardigan. I put on a jacket on top and a nice trouser.
Shoes that are covering my legs properly. Yeah, I think I'm now fine.
Now you've got your Welsh footwear.
Yes, yes, I've got it. But I learnt the hard way. It wasn't easy. I learnt the hard way.
So last year, it was around 5th. We were still staying at the seaside.
That's where when I arrived in Wales, I went to work at the seaside.
We came out of the house. We went to the lodge where we used to stay.
When we opened the door, oh my god, snow. First time we were seeing snow.
We were like, goodness me. We just came out, stepped in the snow, took pictures.
It was interesting. It was really fun.
You say that's the first time you'd seen snow.
Yeah, first time to see snow in my life. Africa doesn't have snow. East Africa doesn't have snow.
So it was amazing. They took pictures, sent them home. It was fun.
And what was the reaction from them?
They were like, oh, she's experiencing the snow now. But this year, the snow has not appeared.
I think the weather has changed. I kept on waiting this time to go for it. Nothing.
Oh, fabulous. Thank you.
So you've talked about you came and you were at the seaside. Have you moved from the seaside now?
I moved from the seaside to the centre now.
So you've lived in a variety of places since you've been here.
I left the seaside. Now I'm at up here in town.
So does that give you a sense of having lived in a different, a series of different places in the last year and a half,
do you have a place that feels home?
Of the three?
Or just what it is that makes it feel home?
Because it's shared accommodation and different cultures, different ways of doing things.
So to me, the three places, none of them has felt like home because the two were for workplace.
Then this one where I am currently, it's just a shared accommodation for working stroke students.
But I'm not a student.
When I'm living with students and it is six people, totally different.
So when I'm in my room, that's it.
When I come out, I have to go to a common bathroom. I go to a common kitchen.
There's a way like looking at my things when I'm at home. It's totally different here.
There are adults, you can't tell them do this.
There's a time I was told to keep in my lens.
So I was like, OK, I think I have to slow down a bit.
Hygiene wise, I think I was looking at it, having the background that I told you all.
I was looking at hygiene, getting off my lens.
And I was like, guys, can you try to be adults and look neat?
Now I look at it the way it is.
I just pray that maybe before this year ends, I get a house which is one room.
I have my own bathroom. I have my own kitchen.
That's when I feel like I'm home because I can do what I want there.
And do you have... So you've got your room, which you said feels OK?
Yeah, my room feels OK. But you see, my room is not complete.
If I don't have where I can cook from, if I don't have my own shower,
I want to shower at a certain time. When you want to go and shower, you find a tochupai.
Then you have to postpone. Your brain is already set to go and shower.
Then you want to cook, you're hungry, go to the kitchen, you find the stove already full.
So my room doesn't... Just because there's a bed that I feel I'm comfortable with, that's it.
Yeah. So that's it with the home arrangement and accommodation.
But home will be when you've got your own space.
If I have my own space, I really, really would want it to be like home in the UK.
Yeah. I want to look at my dining, my kitchen, my everything. I want to look at it neat.
So I can't do it now. I only make my room neat, my bed neat, my room, and that's it. Yeah.
Yeah, that's a challenge, isn't it, Shad? It's a huge challenge.
It's a big challenge because accommodation here is very, very difficult.
The nine months I spent, they would never afford to give us accommodation.
They tell us, unless you're a student, you can get studio accommodation, you can get one room,
unless you're a student, but I'm not a student.
Then I asked them, even those that have got offices that get people accommodation,
you walk in there, they tell you, you have got property for students, yes,
but those of you that are working, not in city.
So the priority here is for students because they are majority, actually.
The universities have taken quite a lot of good accommodation.
I even told the landlady she has properties.
I told her, could you please get me one room house that has a sitting area?
I want to be like home. She said, no, it's not available.
You just can't fit in the shared accommodation for now.
Yeah. Fingers crossed it comes through quickly. Yeah.
It's one and a half years now.
You know, you come from work.
You want to be relaxed a bit, sit in the city, watch TV.
Where would you watch TV from?
The common room, the common area, you can't put your TV there.
Some other person will come and break it.
You do not know. It's so and so and so.
In your room, it's a small room. It's not a big one.
You can't put all the things there.
But anyway, slowly, like you said, fingers crossed.
One day, one morning, I'll wake up and get the house.
Yeah, I'll get it.
I'm still having high hopes of getting that one that will make me feel like home.
Wales.
So if we think a little bit about any point in your life you want to focus on,
so it doesn't just have to be the last year and a bit since you've been in Wales,
but anywhere, is there a place that's felt home to you?
Before I came to the UK, no, I'd never left my country.
I used to move within my country.
But when I used to move within my country, doing whatever studies and so on,
I would get accommodation that would feel like home.
I would get accommodation that would feel like home because I was facilitated for that.
So they would know I'm coming.
They'd get me a place that I would be comfortable so that I'd do my work when I'm happy.
And thinking about, again, across your whole life,
is there a place or a time that is very important to you?
So it might be a really happy memory or it might be a childhood memory
or it might be just a place that you've been that feels like somewhere you'd like to tell me about.
Maybe when I was doing the studies, there's a place where I went and I climbed a very steep hill near the equator.
The hill was too steep, but we didn't walk up the hill.
We went up the hill with small bikes.
So there were expert people that rode us to that steep hill.
You'd look down and you're like, my gosh, if I go off this bike and roll down, they'll never see me again.
So it was interesting.
And we went there for five days.
The first day was terrifying.
The second day, but the fifth day, we were used.
Just sit on the bike, one and a half hours going uphill.
It was interesting.
What was the...
So if you were to take me there, can you tell me what I would say if I was a bit on my own?
Yeah, if you were to go there, because our district, our home district, is a tourist attraction place.
There are plenty of things to look at.
You'd really feel nice going uphill on a small bike, meandering around the hill.
And then you see yourself on the hilltop and you'd be like, he rode me all through here and he didn't trip off.
It would be very nice. You'd really enjoy it.
We get very many people that come from this side and come for holiday there.
There are many things to look at. That would be one.
Then there would be another one where you go there.
Stones that drip like breasts.
Yeah.
It's next to that place, that hilly place.
It is still within the same vicinity.
It would be very interesting for you.
So it's like a breast milk.
Yeah, like real boob of a woman.
It comes out like real breast milk.
So we even call it breast of a certain woman.
This was a historical woman.
So they say that these are when they were moving, they stopped there and they became like monuments.
So people, very many tourists go there.
It's like a cave you go in, but you find the breast, the milk like that stuff dripping.
It drips year in, year out.
It's a tourist attraction.
It's very nice.
You'd love to take pictures, call others to come and look at it.
Yeah, that is it.
Yeah.
It sounds wonderful.
It's really nice. It's really nice.
I always tell people here, East Africa is a place to be.
And is there a time that you've been, have you been many times or once or?
No, every time you go, if you want to, if when I'm home and I want to change environment,
you actually can go there and sit.
The trees are so refreshing.
You just, people take tents there and camp there.
You just go there.
It's a home away from home.
Then you hear the birds singing on top of you in the trees.
It's a really quiet place, nice place to stay.
Not the hilltop, but that other one where there are like breasts.
What the colour's like?
It's a tree. It's green. It's green.
The colour of that one that drips is like a stone. It's brown.
It's like a stone, but you really see it dripping like a breast of a mother.
Yeah.
Oh, it sounds wonderful.
Yeah, it's really interesting.
Would you like to tell me a bit about what your life was like growing up?
When I was growing up, I at around five, I developed asthma.
They first told, they first kept on saying I had bronchitis.
Then from bronchitis, they said asthma.
It really disturbed me from five years up to 16.
Then I had to do it.
I had to leave my home district.
I came to the capital city.
And when I came to the capital city, the asthma checked out.
They used to say you can take some local medicine.
It will heal, but it didn't.
But when I left the cold place and came to a warmer one, it went.
You've come back to the cold and wet.
Yeah, but the cold one now, I completely healed.
Actually, my mum, because my dad does not exist anymore,
my mum was worried. She was like, oh, you're now going to the UK, the winter.
I said no.
I'm no longer asthmatic. I outgrew it.
Yeah.
I outgrew it completely.
I had the same actually.
I was asthmatic.
And then when I got pregnant, it went.
Yeah, you can outgrow it.
You can outgrow it.
Some people don't believe that certain things happen, but it's true.
It's possible.
I just changed.
Actually, it was the pediatrician who advised my parents then that this child, try this.
We've given her plenty of meds.
She's not responding.
Just remove her from this cold weather, take her to the capital city and see how she will be.
As soon as I stepped in the city, the asthma checked out.
That's a big move for you and your family, though.
Yeah. They brought me and kept me with my mum's sister.
They remained there, but I stayed with my mum's sister.
And I didn't have asthma anymore.
Yeah.
So that was it.
So your mum and your mum's sister have been important people for you.
Yeah. Very important.
My mum's sister, I call her mum.
I call her mum because from the time I was young, she was living with my mum.
So when she got married, she came to the capital city.
They were living in the capital city.
My family remained back in our home district.
I came and lived with my mum.
I call her mum, my young mum, my auntie.
So she's really, really good.
She's my friend.
And everybody knows she's my friend.
So they've been a very, very, very strong rock to my growth.
And do you want to talk a little bit about that?
You mentioned your studies a few times.
Would you like to tell us a bit?
My studies? Yeah.
Actually, when I came to live with my auntie, she took me to the hospital.
She went with me.
She told me, come, let's go to the hospital together.
I think she was going for Auntie Nento.
She was going for Auntie Nento, if I'm not forgetting.
Then when I reached there, I looked at the nurses.
Very smart.
They were putting on a uniform that was white, red, and it was ironed with plates.
Very neat.
I told my auntie, I have to put on that uniform.
I like it.
She was like, oh.
I said, no, I have to put on that uniform.
I like it.
I want to become a nurse now because I like the uniform.
That's how I became a nurse.
I actually went to that same school and I did the nursing.
I put on that uniform.
I really used to iron it nicely.
I would feel nice when I'm sitting.
I put all the plates together.
No wrinkles.
That's me.
For three years, I did the general nursing.
And then you specialized?
No, I'm a general nurse.
Then after that, I started doing the studies.
I started doing the studies after that.
But I'm a senior nurse.
Of general nursing, I did not specialize in anything, but the studies, we do them according to the seniority back home.
If you're a senior of a certain level, you can do studies with the people who are current-night researchers.
Do you have a research specialism?
I have certificates of participation and so on.
Is there a topic that you particularly loved working on?
I worked basically on, like in my field.
I never went out of my field.
It was basically HIV.
Then I go to pediatrics.
Then, yeah, it was medical basically.
Yeah.
But in the community, when I was doing my research, I would come across people who have got like domestic problems.
I was trained to do counseling.
So I would do that also.
I would do counseling because that one also I specialized in it.
And is that something you do right?
Very much.
I do it even now.
Someone can be low, feeling really bad and so on.
When I talk to that person, the person really feels, they still hope even after this, I still can make it.
Yeah.
I've spoken to many people who have challenges and they tell me, yeah, your conversation with me has impacted me.
So I feel proud of that.
Yeah.
Really proud.
That actually leads into a question that I have here, which is we talk a lot about magic moments.
So a moment when something changed.
So I don't know if there's a magic moment in your life you'd like to, you've obviously provided them lots for other people, but is there one that you would like to talk about?
Something changed.
When I came to Wales, I didn't have anybody I knew here.
It was quite challenging.
But through work place and church, there's a lady who told me, there's a lady from East Africa.
I will get her contacts.
You meet with her.
She could be from your home district.
To me, that was magic.
She changed everything.
I was like, wow, I even have somebody who's from East Africa, even if she's not from my home district.
And she's Christian.
That one was so nice to me.
It really made me feel really good.
Yeah.
And what was it about that that was so important for you?
So important for me.
I'm sitting with you because of her.
Yeah.
I wouldn't have known that you exist if it were not for her.
So that's why I call her magic.
And another thing, I was, I had challenges with my first job.
She still spoke, told me, go speak to certain certain people.
And right now I'm working.
So to me, she's magic.
Yeah.
She's magic.
She turned around things for me in a joking way.
She's a simple lady, but she's I don't know how we can mention it, but she came timely to me.
She came timely because it was like going to be a challenge.
But all of a sudden she had just a small sentiment.
Go to such a place.
And that was it.
The story changed completely.
And today I'm here with you.
I wouldn't have known that you are here even if it were not for her.
So we've talked a little bit about your hopes, which are around having another having a place where that can be tidy and your own.
Yeah.
Is there anything else you'd like to say about if you imagine the future, what you'd like it to look like?
The future in Wales could be in Wales.
Could be in Wales.
I don't know what your future's going to look like.
My future I would like it to be because I'm a mother of two and my children are not young.
They are young adults.
So in future, maybe if I settled down here, I'd like them to come to Wales and live with me.
Though my son told me, Mom, I can't handle the cold.
I told him, you will get to know that people dress up like this and they handle.
So he was still there.
Even if you're talking of me coming to visit, maybe when it's not cold.
But with the cold, no.
So my future, I look at it like settling down here, having my children come if they want to stay because you can't force an adult to do something.
They can stay if they want to visit.
They visit.
So me, I'll be happy to stay here.
I like Wales.
Yeah, I like Wales.
That's fantastic. Thank you.
Is there anything that, thinking about this as a story that will, your story will be informing how future generations of people think about Wales.
If it goes into the museum, it's about who are the people that live in Wales now.
It's what we want to know.
Is there anything you haven't said that you would like to say that you would like to be noted or for people to know about?
Living in Wales?
Who you are living in Wales now, yeah.
Oh, me.
No, I'm here.
I haven't settled in very well.
But I'm hoping to settle in because I came to work.
And the job got some challenges, but like I told you, she was magic to me.
She turned everything.
So I'm hoping to see myself settle in when I settle in.
In future, I don't know whether I can buy property here and I feel comfortable and I stop renting.
I don't know whether it's possible, but that would be a very good option for me.
Buy property and stop renting.
That's good.
When people have had workmates, about two, they came from England.
I even have a friend who came from England.
When they come here, they don't want to go back.
So they say Wales is very good.
Wales is very quiet.
Wales does not have too much traffic.
I've also witnessed it.
It doesn't have too much traffic.
The few times I've been to London, oh my God, it's too much traffic.
The place is too busy and you feel like, no, I should go back.
Yeah, Wales is a good place.
People come like they are visiting.
People come like they are working.
Before they know, you've settled.
My former workplace, there's a lady who said she came when she was younger than me.
They've lived here for 45 years, but they just came like, you come on holiday with her husband.
After today, they've never gone back.
And they're from England.
So Wales has got that gift of people wanting to leave the noisy place and coming here to settle.
Yeah.
That's what I did.
Came from England.
Yeah.
See?
England is too much traffic, too much excitement, too much of everything.
Everybody is, oh, but here, people come.
That's what I like.
I like quiet environments and I like calm places.
So when I get to England, therefore, a day or two, the third day, I'm like, I should go back.
I should go back, yeah.
That's brilliant.
Thank you.
Have you said everything that you want to say?
Is there anything you'd like to say?
I think so.
If you have got more questions to ask me, I've no problem.
We've covered all our questions, but so it's just if you want to.
Because it's a really good picture of what Wales is.
Now that the sun has come up, one person will like sitting at the beach all the time, looking at the water, seeing the sunset,
seeing the water come towards me as I run away from it and back home.
I did it a lot last year.
Every time I was free, I would go and see.
I like looking at the water.
Yeah.
I'm a beach person.
Me too.
It's so nice.
So refreshing.
Just keep quiet there and look at the water.
Yeah.
Yeah, me too.
That's brilliant.
Thank you so much.